---
pubDate: 2021-08-29
title: Cryodreams
tags:
  - philosophy
  - technology
  - short-story
abstract: Where do you go in cryostasis?
table_of_contents: false
---

# Cryodreams

You lie still on the hospital bed. Just now you were told the full severity of
your situation: the rare disease you've contracted will claim your life in less
than twenty hours. The only known treatment takes days to prepare. The doctors
come back to your room unexpectedly. They have a proposition: you can be
cryogenically frozen for the time it takes to prepare the treatment. It only
takes ten hours to enter a safe stasis. The doctors assure you that you would
experience none of it. If you take this option, they will immediately put you on
a heavy sedative while the preparations and freezing are carried out. The
procedure is still relatively experimental, but you are given 98% figure for
predicted success likelihood. The alternative is certain death, for which the
doctors also offer the sedative.

If you choose cryogenesis, you are immediately given the sedative -- there is
not a minute to waste. Before you start feeling the effects, you take some
moments to consider the rammifications of your choice. Where are you when you
are in stasis? Your body will be uninhabited -- dead in any usual sense of the
word. You memories will be frozen in your brain, but there will be no that can
remember them. This isn't like sleep; when you are asleep, you are conscious
just as much as when you are awake, just in a slightly different way and usually
without much memory after you awake. But there are no cryodreams.

And when a person is thawed to take place in your body -- who is that? They have
the same memories as you, and the same body as you. But there is no continuous
connection between your experience and theirs. That person could have been
thawed -- born -- into another body, perhaps copied into multiple modies. Why
not?

Thinking forward, you feel an undeniable connection to that person thawed into
your body. This person will take your place in everything. They will believe
that they are you, and perhaps they really are you? Your moments of reflection
so far have spun a anxious spiral in your thoughts. But now you glimpse a handle
to grasp onto. You will be no one while your body is in stasis, but once your
body is flawed, you will be the person that awakes inside. Right? Technology for
transplanting memories nowhere close to feasible, so why worry yourself with
these philosophical hypotheticals? Yes, you will be the person that awakes in
your body; _you_ will awake in your body. You will _survive_ this.

You begin to feel the sedative distorting your attention. You force the doubts
out of your mind. If _you_ believe that the awaker is you, and the _awaker_
believes that they are you, then the awaker _is_ you. But what if they don't
remember me? What if I don't believe in them? What if something goes wrong? What
happens to me? Your last thoughts dissapate.

# Use Cases for Cryogensis

This short story above was a short exercise in imagining a medium-term future
use case for cryogenesis, along with the existential dread that might befall
those that experience -- or rather, non-experience -- it.

One popular use case for cryogenesis so commonly referenced is to freeze oneself
with instructions to thaw when medical technology has advaced to the point that
virtual immortality is achievable for oneself. While this is certainly a
possible use case, it is probably infeasible and doesn't have many interesting
medium-term future use cases. Sure, old rich people can freeze themselves when
they become afraid enough of death that they decide its worthwhile to
potentially sacrifice the rest of their normal lifespace for some (very
unpredictable) chance at immortality (or at least a longer lifespan at some
point in the future).

But I think there are plenty of other interesting use cases that have much
nearer-term feasability:

- Freeze someone that would die/suffer in order to wait for a treatment to be
  developed
- TODO: other use cases
