---
pubDate: 2022-08-17
title: Love Exposure
abstract: The story of Aya Koike’s pursuit for love.
tags:
  - movie
  - short-story
table_of_contents: false
---

_(This story is based on the Sion Sono's ["Love Exposure"](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Love_Exposure))_

The story of Aya Koike’s pursuit for love.

As a young girl, Aya is conditioned by her father to believe herself
fundamentally undeserving. Her father, a respected Christian authority, lusts
for her body but holds himself back from actually raping her. He removes to take
out his internal conflict on her, whipping Aya and commanding her to confess
that her body is obscene; obscene, in his eyes, for tempting him away his
fundamental religious values; obscene, in her eyes, for the sinful feelings and
monstrous men that it brings her.

Agonizingly screaming “give it to me” on command by her father that she beg for
a soul, while he  convinces himself that she is maliciously seducing him, Aya
discovers that love is sinful. So when she feels a spark of affection between
herself and a classmate, the only response that comes to her is, first a
masochism for allowing herself to have such sinful ideas and feelings --- she
slits deep into her wrists with a box cutter while looking adoringly in his
direction. Second a murderous vengeance against him for sparking this inside her
--- later, in the bathroom after confessing love to each other and beginning to
have sex, she slits his throat with the same knife, then wanders the school
hallways, covered in his blood, and reminds the other students that “fucking is
a sin.. to be fucked is a sin…”

Aya has a finality with her father. Returning from the mental hospital after her
murderous incident at school, she finds him laying helpless on the bed in the
grips of a stroke, and with a stiff erection. As she ponders this opportunity,
she finds herself unable to draw her attention away from his penis. After all
the abuse, he has taught her to be so thoroughly afraid of his instrument, but
here it was, available to her any whim. She thinks of her father more in terms
of his penis than in any other terms. She plays with his penis thoughtfully, and
even pretends to have sex with him. Finally she resolves to spare this monster
after all, but not the man. In perhaps the most gruesome way possible, she first
snaps his erection with her hands, and then uses a common pair of scissors to
finish off the castration.

With the deed done, she calls the police and gives them a ridiculous excuse for
what happened --- her father fell down and hurt his penis, so she decide to cut
it off to help ease the pain. But, apparently the  ruse works. Aya never sees
her father again, the last time being when she laughed over his dying, or
perhaps already dead body, on a hospital bed.

Through with the Christian demon that mentally raped and physically all-but
raped her, she is free. She still knows that she is fundamental undeserving,
which makes her well positioned to accept the 0 Church. Soon after she is set
free, she encounters the the leader of a new cult, the 0 Church. The exact
teachings of 0 are never clear, but the central focus is on recognizing one’s
own sins and accepting the utter forgiveness of God, conditional on you aiding
the 0 Church’s practices and requirements. Aya allows herself to be taken in by
the 0 Church’s charismatic leader, but she never accepts the practices. She sees
0 for the manipulative cult that it is, and as an opportunity to take advantage
of. She fully admits to her sins, but does not accept the forgiveness of God ---
the God that was her father.

Aya learns to use the Church for her own sadistic ends. She develops a charisma
herself, dead set on acquiring money and recruits for the 0 Church by whatever
means possible. She runs a fake charity, sells fake religious artifacts, and
even deals cocaine. But nothing, not even her power and success at 0, truly
satisfies her. Eventually she realizes that what she actually craves, and has
been subconsciously striving for by manipulating others, is to be genuinely
desired by someone. Growing more mature, she can no longer fully suppressed her
urges to  actually feel deserved, to find a love that replaces the nightmares of
her father’s twisted lust. But she sees no man that can offer this.

Then one day, Aya meets the upskirt-photographer Yu Honda. She is slightly
annoyed that Yu takes some photos of her panties, at first dismissing him as
another common pervert among men, but he provokes Aya’s curiosity when she
notices that he appears to take no perverted pleasure in the subject and instead
treats it as a sort of challenging exercise. She stalks him to his home, and
then to the church of Yu’s father. In the pouring rain, it’s unclear what
exactly he is doing, so she and her assistants approach him at last. He offers
no resistance. Aya’s assistants assume that Aya wants to beat him up because of
the panty photos, but Aya surprisingly decides to forgive him instead. She sees
that there is something special about this male, who appears not to necessarily
be a another dick-guided demon even though he otherwise acts just like one. When
she announces her forgiveness for him, a jolt of warmth runs through her,
something she did not know how to respond to, but she smiles. All Aya shows is
that she is fascinated with the boy, and that she needed to keep his virginity
pure for herself.

Most importantly, she needs to uncover Yu’s love. However, Aya knows that she
could not instigate it herself. So, she profile’s Yu and identifies his perfect
and convenient mate: a girl named Yoko with a similarly tragic upbringing
complete with a sexually abusive father an abrasive relationship with religion.
An in fact, Aya picks Yoko because Aya sees herself in the girl, and sees the
same spark for love with Yu that she sees in herself.

Aya orchestrates Yu and Yoko’s fall into love, but making sure that they cannot
get too physically close so as to ruin Yu’s purity. In the first stage of the
orchestration, Yu is forced to conceal his identity behind Miss Scorpion in
order to not drive away Yoko due to an instinctual hatred of men that Aya knows
all too well. In the second stage, Aya socially engineers the merging of Yu and
Yoko’s families and infiltrates the home. But, Aya gets a little tempted by the
strength and genuineness of Yoko’s lesbian love, and so indulges in sensual
desires with her. Aya is not skilled at showing affection, and it comes very
awkwardly to her. But in finally having sensuality with Yoko’s body, she tries
to learn from and absorb some of Yoko’s love. As a side effect, she demonstrates
to Yu that he cannot have Yoko after all. And all the while that Aya is in the
home, she cannot draw her attention away from Yu. She spies on him, searches
through his room, and tries to mildly seduce him. But she can see that Yu’s love
for Yoko is persistent, even though she wants nothing to do with him. This
fascinates Aya even more, but worries her that it may be hard to separate them.
So when Yu pulls and ultimatum and reveals the identity of Miss Scorpion to
Yoko, Aya finally pulls the family into  the 0 Church and cuts them away from
Yu. And with Yoko under her control, Away can manipulate Yu into coming to her.

After thoroughly programming Yoko and the parents, Aya releases Yoko back into
the public so that Yu may find her and lose hope at last. Yu is surprisingly
persistent, but it is to no avail as he is unable to unprogram Yoko. She has
been thoroughly convinced that Yu’s interest in her is purely perverted,
evidenced by the uncontrollable erection that Yu gets whenever he sees her. Aya
even seems to pressure Yoko into cutting off Yu’s penis, in a reflective act to
the one she performed on her own father, but Yoko cannot bring herself to and
Aya does not push her further. She knows that Yoko’s only hesitation was due to
confusion, stress, and calorie restriction, otherwise she could have been easily
pressured into castrating Yu. But, Aya does not want Yu castrated, she just
wants Yu to know that Yoko is hopeless and even dangerous to him.

Aya continues to use Yoko as a remote control for Yu, and eventually brings Yu
into the 0 Church. Yu is allowed some exposure to Yoko, and Aya uses these
meetings as more opportunity to point out the perversion of Yu’s love for Yoko.
Aya is starting to become concerned that this has gone too far, and that she is
losing control of Yu even though he is so close. The only way she knows to
sexually communicate are in terms of abuse and perversion. She does not want to
lose Yu to Yoko, so she must declare the relationship perverse and do everything
she can to make them turn away from each other. But, Aya is failing. At this
point, Aya tries to seduce Yu more and more. Even though she has told him how
perverse his erection is in front of Yoko, she tells him its okay to be erect
when Yu is with Aya. She even takes many opportunities to feel his hard penis.
The final stage of Aya’s orchestration is now to turn Yu’s undying love away
from Yoko and towards herself. But, no matter what she tries, from cultish
indoctrination and psychological abuse, nothing works. Yu’s dedication to Yoko
is unwavering.

Aya realizes that there must be a miracle to change Yu’s mind. He must come to a
point where he truly sees that Yoko’s love is impossible. So, she gathers the
parents and Yoko together, for Yu to come and find and discover that his
feelings for Yoko and relationships with his parents are hopeless, and that love
with Aya is the only option.

Yu makes it to the room as planned, having brutally fought off many of the 0
Church’s security in a slashing frenzy, but is finally subdued.  Aya focuses
only on Yu now. She has him so close. This is the final step to bring them
together. She just needs to tear his previous expectations for love and then
fill that void herself. Yu detonates a bomb somewhere in the building, and Aya
starts to panic realizing time is almost up. Soon Yoko has Yu on the ground
under her, trying to choke him out of his crazy love for her for the last time.
Yoko is so filled with rage that she threw off some security to do this final
act herself. As Yu slowly loses breath, still calling out Yoko’s name, Yu snaps.
He realizes that Yoko is not going to stop. She is utterly beyond his reach. In
that moment his love dies. And Aya sees it. She sees the love leave Yu’s mind.
He throws off Yoko and combats in futile with the security. But when Yu’s love
vanishes, Aya sees that there is no void left for her to fill. Aya  sees that Yu
is just like herself now --- an empty shell no longer able to experience that
such as love. She had killed off the love that she had so desperately wanted,
which she had only a taste of through Yoko, but could not internalize and so had
Yu’s purity was no longer a treasure to preserve for herself, but a fate sealed
beyond her power.

Aya’s only drive bled away as madness consumed Yu’s pupils. She had closed her
hand too hard around what she now realized was a delicate specialness in Yu,
forever lost. For a brief moment, it Yu reminds Aya of herself --- giving up
hope in love and seeing it for the perverse obscenity that it always is. In Yu’s
insanity, she sees a familiarity and realizes that she has been insane since she
joined 0. In a hopeless plea, she begs to the Yu in her imagination “give it to
me… give it to me…” --- the only language to express her emotional unmaking. Aya
reserves a small smile and cry as the same warmth that she first felt from Yu
fills her again along the edge of a katana.
